See p.80ff in https://science.osti.gov/-/media/grants/pdf/foas/2026/DE-FOA-0003612.pdf

B. Review Criteria
Applications will be subjected to merit review and will be evaluated against the following
criteria, listed in descending order of importance:
1. Scientific and/or Technical Merit and Impact
2. Technical Approach, Methods, and Feasibility
3. Team, Resources, and Management
4. Commercialization Potential for Energy Applications (Criteria 4 will only be
considered by applied technology development applications.)
5. Budget and Cost-Effectiveness
Note that reviewers are selected regarding both their expertise and the absence of
conflict-of-interest issues. Both Federal and non-Federal reviewers may be used, and submission
of an application constitutes agreement that this is acceptable to the investigator(s) and the
submitting institution.
The questions below are provided to the merit reviewers to elaborate the criteria. For
applications that span from fundamental research to applied technology development both
review criteria apply.

Criterion 1: Scientific and/or Technical Merit and Impact
For Fundamental Research Applications:
• What is the scientific innovation of the proposed research?
• How well does the proposed research achieve AI advantage?
• What is the likelihood of achieving valuable results?
• How might the results of the proposed work impact the direction, progress, and thinking
in relevant scientific fields of research?
• How original and innovative is the proposed scientific approach, or concept?
• How well does the proposed work articulate its contribution to the related scientific
community or mission application?

Criterion 2: Technical Approach, Methods, and Feasibility
For All Applications:
• How logically sound, well justified, and appropriate is the proposed methodology for
achieving the stated objectives?
• Does the proposed research employ innovative concepts or methods?
• Are the experimental design, theoretical models, and/or computational simulations robust
and adequately detailed?
• Have potential challenges and risks been identified, and are the proposed mitigation
strategies reasonable and comprehensive?
• Does the application provide a clear and realistic timeline for key project activities and
milestones?

Criterion 3: Team, Resources, and Management
For All Applications:
• How well qualified is the research team to carry out the proposed work?
• Does the project team possess the necessary expertise across all relevant disciplines to be
successful?
• To what extent does the application demonstrate a clear, well-coordinated collaboration
among partnering institutions, with appropriately balanced responsibilities, synergistic
contributions, and clearly defined roles for each team member?
Are the proposed facilities, equipment, and other resources, including access to data and
AI models, adequate and appropriate for conducting the research/development?

Criterion 5: Budget and Cost-Effectiveness
For All Applications:
• Is the proposed budget reasonable, well-justified, and appropriate for the scope and scale
of the proposed work?
• Does the cost share meet the RFA requirements and reflect a strong commitment from the
applicant or team?
• Does the application demonstrate efficient use of resources and provide good value for
the federal investment or foster collaboration with DOE/NNSA National Laboratories,
academia, and relevant industries to leverage collective expertise for mission
applications?



